examples/webkiosk/README.md, before:

Build an image which automatically boots into kiosk mode to run an web application on Wayland.

This is a very simple system which includes one of the built-in config files, overrides some settings and uses a custom layer to:

* Install a set of packages over and above those provided by the base which are needed to run the kiosk
* Install and enable a systemd service to automatically run the kiosk at boot up

```text
examples/webkiosk/
|-- config
|   `-- kiosk.yaml
|-- kiosk.service.tpl
|-- layer
|   `-- kiosk.yaml
`-- README.md
```

Note: This relies on the base provided by the built-in configuration included by kiosk.yaml. Including this file is not necessary if kiosk.yaml specifies all attributes/layers.
To deploy a production kiosk system it is envisaged that a specific config file would be used, therefore giving full control over the base system to the developer.

Usage of `-S` allows rpi-image-gen to locate the config file automatically because the source directory (`./examples/webkiosk/`) is prioritised in the search path.

```bash
rpi-image-gen build -S ./examples/webkiosk/ -c kiosk.yaml
```

Commit message:

examples: webkiosk: Update to Trixie AB base
Update the Chromium kiosk example so it has a Debian Trixie AB base.
Chromium needs to have correct system time before it can validate
certificates, so make the kiosk systemd service depend on timesync
being acquired before it starts.
Clean up config and readme, making it clear the example uses AB, and
rename the example layer to avoid reference confusion in docs.

examples/webkiosk/README.md, after:

Build an image which automatically boots into kiosk mode to run an web application on Wayland.

This is a very simple system which includes one of the built-in config files, overrides some settings and uses a custom layer to:

* Install a set of packages over and above those provided by the base which are needed to run the kiosk
* Install and enable a systemd service to automatically run the kiosk at boot up

It also uses the AB image layout to support switching between slots should upgrade functionality be included.

Note: This relies on the built-in configuration included by kiosk.yaml. Including this file is not necessary if kiosk.yaml specifies all attributes/layers.
To deploy a production kiosk system it is envisaged that a specific config file would be used, therefore giving full control over the base system to the developer.

Usage of `-S` allows rpi-image-gen to locate the config file automatically because the source directory (`./examples/webkiosk/`) is prioritised in the search path.

```bash
rpi-image-gen build -S ./examples/webkiosk/ -c kiosk.yaml
```
