docs/config/index.adoc, before:

= rpi-image-gen Configuration System
:author: rpi-image-gen documentation
:toc: left
:toclevels: 3
:sectlinks:
:sectanchors:

link:../index.adoc[← Back to Main Documentation]

== Overview

rpi-image-gen provides a flexible, hierarchical approach to managing build variables through multiple configuration sources with clear precedence rules. The system is built around the `IGconf_` prefix namespace and supports both INI and YAML file formats.

== Core Architecture

=== Variable Naming Convention

Excluding environment keys, configuration variables in rpi-image-gen use the `IGconf_` prefix followed by a structured naming pattern:

[source]
----
IGconf_<section>_<key>
----

Where:

* **section**: Logical grouping (e.g., `device`, `image`)
* **key**: Specific configuration parameter (e.g., `class`, `storage_type`, `hostname`)

Example variables:
[source,bash]
----
IGconf_device_class=pi5
IGconf_device_storage_type=sd
IGconf_image_compression=zstd
----

=== Layer Variable Declaration

Variables are declared by layer YAML files using metadata headers within comment blocks:

[source,yaml]
----
# METABEGIN
# X-Env-Layer-Name: rpi5
# X-Env-Layer-Category: device
# X-Env-Layer-Desc: Raspberry Pi 5 specific device layer
#
# X-Env-VarPrefix: device
#
# X-Env-Var-class: pi5
# X-Env-Var-class-Desc: Device class
# X-Env-Var-class-Required: n
# X-Env-Var-class-Valid: keywords:pi5
# X-Env-Var-class-Set: y
#
# X-Env-Var-storage_type: sd
# X-Env-Var-storage_type-Desc: Pi5 storage type
# X-Env-Var-storage_type-Required: n
# X-Env-Var-storage_type-Valid: sd,nvme
# X-Env-Var-storage_type-Set: y
# METAEND
----

==== Variable Declaration Metadata

Each variable declaration includes several metadata fields:

* **X-Env-Var-<name>**: Default value for the variable
* **X-Env-Var-<name>-Desc**: Human-readable description
* **X-Env-Var-<name>-Required**: Whether the variable is required (`y`/`n`)
* **X-Env-Var-<name>-Valid**: Validation rules (keywords, patterns, etc.)
* **X-Env-Var-<name>-Set**: Variable assignment policy

==== Variable Prefix

The `X-Env-VarPrefix` field specifies the section name used in the `IGconf_` namespace:

[source]
----
X-Env-VarPrefix: device
----

Results in variables like:
[source,bash]
----
IGconf_device_class=pi5
IGconf_device_storage_type=sd
----

=== Anchors

Anchors are declared in a variable's metadata and are definitive remapping points for paths and other environment values. They allow locations to be described in an abstract way (eg, `@IGROOT`, `@SRCROOT`) and are resolved by the engine automatically, never leaking to the shell. Anchors enable support of different contexts (eg, host vs. container, with different root paths) without rewriting layer or config files. The resolver replaces ${@ANCHOR} with the concrete value from the anchor registry when producing the final environment. From a simplistic viewpoint, an anchor is essentially a shortcut to a variable's value.

The engine automatically sets a small number of default anchors. These are listed below:

[cols="1,1,4", options="header"]
|===
| Anchor    | Scope   | Description
| @IGROOT   | Always  | Root path of rpi-image-gen tree
| @SRCROOT  | -S only | Root path of source directory
|===

An Anchor is declared in layer metadata as follows:
[source,yaml]
----
# X-Env-Var-dir: ${IGconf_sys_workroot}/${IGconf_target_context}
# X-Env-Var-dir-Anchor: @TARGETDIR
# X-Env-Var-dir-Desc: Directory containing the target and related build artefacts.
----

An anchor can be used in a config file as follows:
[source,yaml]
----
layer:
  app: example-kiosk
  extra: rpi-splash-screen

splash:
  image_path: ${@SRCROOT}/my.tga
----
In this case, when building sources via `-S`, `IGconf_splash_image_path` resolves to `/path/to/source/dir/my.tga`. This can be observed in the output:

[source,bash]
----
$ rpi-image-gen build -S ./examples/webkiosk/ -c kiosk.yaml
...
FINAL ENV
-> IGconf_splash_image_path : /path/to/repos/raspberrypi/rpi-image-gen/examples/webkiosk/my.tga
----

== Configuration File Support

The configuration system supports both INI and YAML file formats with automatic format detection based on file extension.

=== YAML Configuration Format

YAML provides the most flexible configuration format with native support for hierarchical data and includes:

[source,yaml]
----
include:
  file: base.yaml

env:
  MYVAR: UNCHANGED

device:
  class: pi5
  storage_type: sd
  hostname: ${IGconf_device_class}-$(tr -dc 'a-z' < /dev/urandom | head -c 6)

image:
  compression: zstd
  boot_part_size: 200%
  root_part_size: 300%
----

=== INI Configuration Format

INI format provides traditional section-based configuration:

[source,ini]
----
!include base.cfg

[env]
MYVAR = UNCHANGED

[device]
class = pi5
storage_type = sd
hostname = ${IGconf_device_class}-$(tr -dc 'a-z' < /dev/urandom | head -c 6)

[image]
compression = zstd
boot_part_size = 200%
root_part_size = 300%
----

=== Configuration Includes

Both formats support including other configuration files to promote reusability and modularity. The include precedence order is shown in the table below.

[cols="1,6,5"]
|===
|Priority |Source |Description

|1 (Highest)
|Parent directory of the including file
|

|2
|<src dir>/config
|The source directory if specified via the command line

|3 (Lowest)
|<built-in>/config
|Default in-tree location, eg ```/usr/share/rpi-image-gen/config/```
|===

==== YAML Includes

[source,yaml]
----
include:
  file: shared/base.yaml
----

==== INI Includes

[source,ini]
----
!include shared/base.cfg
----

Therefore, included files are resolved using:

1. **Parent directory**
2. **Search path**

== Variable Sources and Precedence

The configuration system supports multiple variable sources with a clear precedence hierarchy:

[cols="1,6,5"]
|===
|Priority |Source |Description

|1 (Highest)
|Command Line Overrides
|Variables specified after `--` on the command line

|2
|Configuration Files
|INI or YAML configuration files

|3 (Lowest)
|Layer Defaults
|Default values declared in layer metadata
|===

=== Command Line Overrides

Variables can be set directly on the command line as overrides after `--`, taking the highest precedence:

[source,bash]
----
rpi-image-gen build -c config.yaml -- IGconf_device_class=pi5 IGconf_image_compression=xz
----

Command-line overrides are handled by the calling shell before the engine sees them.

== Variable Expansion

The engine supports deferred variable expansion, meaning that it's possible to forward-declare references to other variables. Variables are resolved in the pipeline phase rather than the config file parsing phase. Provided a variable is declared, the engine will resolve it. Values assigned to all variables must adhere to POSIX‑sh syntax.

=== Environment Variable Expansion

[source,yaml]
----
device:
  name: controllerbox
  rev: 2
  hostname: ${IGconf_device_name}-$(uuidgen | cut -d'-' -f1)

image:
  assetdir: ${WORKSPACE}/build/assets/${IGconf_device_name}-rev${IGconf_device_rev}

ssh:
  pubkey_user1: ${DEPLOY}/device/baseassets/id_rsa.pub
  pubkey_only: y
----

Care must be taken if using the command line to assign a value to a variable if the value contains spaces or newlines. Making sure the calling shell expands it into a single argument ensures the command substitution happens once and stays on one line:

[source,bash]
----
rpi-image-gen build -c config.yaml -- "IGconf_ssh_pubkey_user1=$(< /path/to/.ssh/id_rsa.pub)"
----

Assigning a variable and preserving the literal value can be performed using single quotes:

[source,bash]
----
rpi-image-gen build -c config.yaml -- 'IGconf_ssh_pubkey_user1=$(cat /path/to/.ssh/id_rsa.pub)'
----

The above yield identical results in the build configuration for the value of `IGconf_ssh_pubkey_user1`. The difference is that the first expands the value immediately upon assignment using the calling shell (eg Bash) before engine processing. The second keeps the literal text, which is expanded during engine processing using POSIX-sh.

=== Expansion Context

Variables are resolved after configuration parsing and layer assembly, and then expanded. Expansion is performed with a **strict policy** using `/bin/sh` with `POSIXLY_CORRECT=1` under `set -eu` in a 'clean room' environment. This means:

  ** **errexit (set -e)**: Exit immediately if any command returns a non-zero exit status, including when variable expansion fails or returns an error.
  ** **nounset (set -u)**: Treat unset variables as errors during expansion - attempting to expand a variable that hasn't been set will exit with an error instead of expanding to an empty string.
  ** When these are combined, variable expansion is strict and fails quickly. Any attempt to expand an undefined variable will cause the build to exit immediately.

[NOTE]
====
There may be a need to handle non-alphanumeric characters in config files and/or command line arguments. Input files are parsed as-is, without stripping quotes. In YAML, quote only when you need YAML to treat the value as a string (eg, URLs can be unquoted: `url: https://...`). On the command line, use shell quoting when needed to protect special characters or expansions (eg, `rpi-image-gen build -c <args> -- IGconf_device_user1pass='Fo0bar!!'`).
====

=== Cross-Reference Expansion

Variables can reference other configuration variables:

[source,yaml]
----
device:
  class: pi5
  hostname: ${IGconf_device_class}-server

image:
  name: ${IGconf_device_class}-custom-image
----

=== Layer Variable Dependencies

Layer dependencies can use config or command line variable assignments to create dynamic dependency resolution:

[source,yaml]
----
# METABEGIN
# X-Env-Layer-Name: arch-specific-tools
# X-Env-Layer-Requires: base-layer,${ARCH}-toolchain,${DISTRO}-packages
# METAEND
----

This allows layers to dynamically depend on other layers based on build-time set variables:

[source,bash]
----
# Set variables on the command line
$ rpi-image-gen build -c <args> -- ARCH=arm64 DISTRO=debian
...
# Layer dependencies will be equivalent to:
# X-Env-Layer-Requires: base-layer, arm64-toolchain, debian-packages
----

This feature enables dynamic layer selection. For example, one usage could be to use the same layer across different build environments to support toolchain selection based on target architecture. By using variables in the 'parent' layer, dynamic dependency resolution pulls in an architecture specific toolchain 'child' layer.

[NOTE]
====
Layer discovery will fail if variables referenced in dependencies are not set.
====

[IMPORTANT]
====
Variable dependencies are evaluated during layer discovery, not during layer variable expansion. This ensures dependencies are resolved before layer processing begins. Only variables set in the config file or on the command line can be used in layer dependencies.

All dependencies are always included, i.e. variable names result in actual layer names at build-time. For example, `${ARCH}-toolchain` always results in a dependency, but the specific layer name depends on the `ARCH` environment variable value.
====

== Configuration Loading

=== Processing Overview

The configuration system processes files using the following steps:

1. **Parse main configuration file** - Automatically detects INI or YAML format
2. **Process includes recursively** - Follows include directives with circular dependency detection
3. **Apply command line overrides** - Processes variables specified after `--`
4. **Generate output** - Either loads into environment or writes to file

== Command Line Interface

=== Config Command

The `config` command provides direct access to configuration functionality:

[source,bash]
----
# Load all sections into environment
rpi-image-gen config myconfig.yaml

# Load specific section
rpi-image-gen config myconfig.yaml --section device

# Write resolved config to file
rpi-image-gen config myconfig.yaml --write-to build.env

# Use command line overrides
rpi-image-gen config myconfig.yaml -- IGconf_device_class=pi5 IGconf_image_compression=xz

# Custom include search paths
rpi-image-gen config myconfig.yaml --path "./config:./shared:./templates"

# Disable variable expansion
rpi-image-gen config myconfig.yaml --no-expand

# Combine options with overrides
rpi-image-gen config myconfig.yaml --section device --write-to build.env -- IGconf_device_class=pi5
----

=== Config Generation

Generate example configuration files:

[source,bash]
----
# Generate boilerplate INI and YAML examples
rpi-image-gen config --gen

# Migrate INI to YAML format
rpi-image-gen config legacy.cfg --migrate > modern.yaml
----

== Integration with Layer System

=== Layer Variable Discovery

The configuration system integrates with the layer management system to:

1. **Discover declared variables** from layer metadata
2. **Validate variable values** against declared constraints
3. **Apply variable policies** (immediate, lazy, force, skip)
4. **Resolve variable dependencies** between layers

=== Variable Policies

Variables support different assignment policies:

* **immediate**: Set the variable if it is currently unset (first-wins strategy). This is the default behavior.
* **lazy**: Applied after all layers are processed (last-wins strategy). Useful for defaults that can be overridden.
* **force**: Always overwrite existing environment value, regardless of what was set before.
* **skip**: Never set the variable.

Refer to the layer documentation for further details.

=== Layer Build Order

Variables are processed in layer dependency order, ensuring that:

1. **Base layer variables** are available to dependent layers
2. **Variable expansion** can reference previously set values
3. **Validation** occurs with complete variable context

== Best Practices

=== Configuration Organisation

1. **Use base configurations** for common settings across builds
2. **Layer-specific overrides** in focused configuration files
3. **Environment-specific values** in separate configuration files
4. **Runtime overrides** via command-line arguments after `--`

=== Variable Naming

1. **Follow prefix conventions** with logical section grouping
2. **Use descriptive names** that indicate purpose and scope
3. **Consistent naming patterns** within configuration sections

=== File Structure

[source]
----
config/
├── base.yaml              # Common base configuration
├── environments/
│   ├── development.yaml   # Development overrides
│   ├── staging.yaml      # Staging overrides
│   └── production.yaml   # Production overrides
└── variants/
    ├── local.yaml       # Local development settings
    └── ci.yaml          # CI/CD specific settings
----

=== Variable Expansion Security

1. **Validate input** in configuration files to prevent injection
2. **Limit variable scope** to prevent unintended expansion
3. **Use quotes** for values containing special characters
4. **Test expansion** in controlled environments before production

== Error Handling and Debugging

=== Common Configuration Issues

* **Circular includes**: Detected automatically with clear error messages
* **Missing include files**: Searches all configured paths before failing
* **Invalid YAML/INI syntax**: Provides line numbers and context
* **Undefined variable expansion**: Fails fast with variable name
* **Section/key conflicts**: Resolved by precedence rules

=== Debugging Configuration

1. **Use `--write-to`** to see resolved variable values
2. **Check precedence** with CFG/OVR output prefixes
3. **Validate includes** by examining search path messages
4. **Run interactively** to allow a pseudo 'dry-run' stepped flow
5. **Test expansion** with simple configuration files

=== Output Interpretation

Configuration loading outputs show variable sources:

[source]
----
CFG IGconf_device_class=pi5         # From configuration file
OVR IGconf_device_hostname=pi5-test  # From command line override
----

Layer collection output shows variable policy and evaluated value:

[source]
----
 [SET]  IGconf_device_class=pi5 (layer: rpi5)
 [SKIP]  IGconf_device_hostname (already set)
 [LAZY]  IGconf_device_variant=none (layer: device-base)
----

== Migration and Compatibility

=== INI to YAML Migration

Use the built-in migration tool:

[source,bash]
----
rpi-image-gen config legacy.cfg --migrate > modern.yaml
----

The migration tool:

* **Preserves include directives** with updated syntax
* **Maintains section structure** and variable relationships
* **Updates file extensions** in include references
* **Adds migration comments** for traceability

=== Backward Compatibility

The configuration system maintains compatibility with:

* **Existing INI files** through automatic format detection
* **Legacy include syntax** (`!include` vs `include:`)
* **Environment variable patterns** used by previous versions
* **Command-line interfaces** with extended functionality

== Performance Considerations

=== Configuration Loading Performance

* **Lazy evaluation** of variable expansion where possible
* **Caching of included files** to avoid repeated parsing
* **Minimal environment manipulation** during loading
* **Efficient precedence resolution** without redundant checks

== Summary

The rpi-image-gen configuration system provides a robust foundation for managing complex build configurations through:

* **Hierarchical variable organisation** with the `IGconf_` namespace
* **Multiple configuration sources** with clear precedence rules
* **Flexible file formats** (INI and YAML) with include support
* **Variable expansion** supporting cross-references and environment integration
* **Layer system integration** for variable discovery and validation
* **Command-line tools** for configuration management and debugging

Commit message:

core: Escape literal $ in config values
Allow only ${VAR} and $(cmd) expansions. Treat other $ as literals.

This should fit with the plan to support hashed passwords in build
configurations because, while standards don't guarantee ${ or $( will
never appear in a hash string, common formats don’t appear to use those
sequences - they use $ as a delimiter immediately followed by a character
set such as [A-Za-z0-9./].

Refs:
crypt(5)

Required for #82
Required by #167

docs/config/index.adoc, after:

= rpi-image-gen Configuration System
:author: rpi-image-gen documentation
:toc: left
:toclevels: 3
:sectlinks:
:sectanchors:

link:../index.adoc[← Back to Main Documentation]

== Overview

rpi-image-gen provides a flexible, hierarchical approach to managing build variables through multiple configuration sources with clear precedence rules. The system is built around the `IGconf_` prefix namespace and supports both INI and YAML file formats.

== Core Architecture

=== Variable Naming Convention

Excluding environment keys, configuration variables in rpi-image-gen use the `IGconf_` prefix followed by a structured naming pattern:

[source]
----
IGconf_<section>_<key>
----

Where:

* **section**: Logical grouping (e.g., `device`, `image`)
* **key**: Specific configuration parameter (e.g., `class`, `storage_type`, `hostname`)

Example variables:
[source,bash]
----
IGconf_device_class=pi5
IGconf_device_storage_type=sd
IGconf_image_compression=zstd
----

=== Layer Variable Declaration

Variables are declared by layer YAML files using metadata headers within comment blocks:

[source,yaml]
----
# METABEGIN
# X-Env-Layer-Name: rpi5
# X-Env-Layer-Category: device
# X-Env-Layer-Desc: Raspberry Pi 5 specific device layer
#
# X-Env-VarPrefix: device
#
# X-Env-Var-class: pi5
# X-Env-Var-class-Desc: Device class
# X-Env-Var-class-Required: n
# X-Env-Var-class-Valid: keywords:pi5
# X-Env-Var-class-Set: y
#
# X-Env-Var-storage_type: sd
# X-Env-Var-storage_type-Desc: Pi5 storage type
# X-Env-Var-storage_type-Required: n
# X-Env-Var-storage_type-Valid: sd,nvme
# X-Env-Var-storage_type-Set: y
# METAEND
----

==== Variable Declaration Metadata

Each variable declaration includes several metadata fields:

* **X-Env-Var-<name>**: Default value for the variable
* **X-Env-Var-<name>-Desc**: Human-readable description
* **X-Env-Var-<name>-Required**: Whether the variable is required (`y`/`n`)
* **X-Env-Var-<name>-Valid**: Validation rules (keywords, patterns, etc.)
* **X-Env-Var-<name>-Set**: Variable assignment policy

==== Variable Prefix

The `X-Env-VarPrefix` field specifies the section name used in the `IGconf_` namespace:

[source]
----
X-Env-VarPrefix: device
----

Results in variables like:
[source,bash]
----
IGconf_device_class=pi5
IGconf_device_storage_type=sd
----

=== Anchors

Anchors are declared in a variable's metadata and are definitive remapping points for paths and other environment values. They allow locations to be described in an abstract way (eg, `@IGROOT`, `@SRCROOT`) and are resolved by the engine automatically, never leaking to the shell. Anchors enable support of different contexts (eg, host vs. container, with different root paths) without rewriting layer or config files. The resolver replaces ${@ANCHOR} with the concrete value from the anchor registry when producing the final environment. From a simplistic viewpoint, an anchor is essentially a shortcut to a variable's value.

The engine automatically sets a small number of default anchors. These are listed below:

[cols="1,1,4", options="header"]
|===
| Anchor    | Scope   | Description
| @IGROOT   | Always  | Root path of rpi-image-gen tree
| @SRCROOT  | -S only | Root path of source directory
|===

An Anchor is declared in layer metadata as follows:
[source,yaml]
----
# X-Env-Var-dir: ${IGconf_sys_workroot}/${IGconf_target_context}
# X-Env-Var-dir-Anchor: @TARGETDIR
# X-Env-Var-dir-Desc: Directory containing the target and related build artefacts.
----

An anchor can be used in a config file as follows:
[source,yaml]
----
layer:
  app: example-kiosk
  extra: rpi-splash-screen

splash:
  image_path: ${@SRCROOT}/my.tga
----
In this case, when building sources via `-S`, `IGconf_splash_image_path` resolves to `/path/to/source/dir/my.tga`. This can be observed in the output:

[source,bash]
----
$ rpi-image-gen build -S ./examples/webkiosk/ -c kiosk.yaml
...
FINAL ENV
-> IGconf_splash_image_path : /path/to/repos/raspberrypi/rpi-image-gen/examples/webkiosk/my.tga
----

== Configuration File Support

The configuration system supports both INI and YAML file formats with automatic format detection based on file extension.

=== YAML Configuration Format

YAML provides the most flexible configuration format with native support for hierarchical data and includes:

[source,yaml]
----
include:
  file: base.yaml

env:
  MYVAR: UNCHANGED

device:
  class: pi5
  storage_type: sd
  hostname: ${IGconf_device_class}-$(tr -dc 'a-z' < /dev/urandom | head -c 6)

image:
  compression: zstd
  boot_part_size: 200%
  root_part_size: 300%
----

=== INI Configuration Format

INI format provides traditional section-based configuration:

[source,ini]
----
!include base.cfg

[env]
MYVAR = UNCHANGED

[device]
class = pi5
storage_type = sd
hostname = ${IGconf_device_class}-$(tr -dc 'a-z' < /dev/urandom | head -c 6)

[image]
compression = zstd
boot_part_size = 200%
root_part_size = 300%
----

=== Configuration Includes

Both formats support including other configuration files to promote reusability and modularity. The include precedence order is shown in the table below.

[cols="1,6,5"]
|===
|Priority |Source |Description

|1 (Highest)
|Parent directory of the including file
|

|2
|<src dir>/config
|The source directory if specified via the command line

|3 (Lowest)
|<built-in>/config
|Default in-tree location, eg ```/usr/share/rpi-image-gen/config/```
|===

==== YAML Includes

[source,yaml]
----
include:
  file: shared/base.yaml
----

==== INI Includes

[source,ini]
----
!include shared/base.cfg
----

Therefore, included files are resolved using:

1. **Parent directory**
2. **Search path**

== Variable Sources and Precedence

The configuration system supports multiple variable sources with a clear precedence hierarchy:

[cols="1,6,5"]
|===
|Priority |Source |Description

|1 (Highest)
|Command Line Overrides
|Variables specified after `--` on the command line

|2
|Configuration Files
|INI or YAML configuration files

|3 (Lowest)
|Layer Defaults
|Default values declared in layer metadata
|===

=== Command Line Overrides

Variables can be set directly on the command line as overrides after `--`, taking the highest precedence:

[source,bash]
----
rpi-image-gen build -c config.yaml -- IGconf_device_class=pi5 IGconf_image_compression=xz
----

Command-line overrides are handled by the calling shell before the engine sees them.

== Variable Expansion

The engine supports deferred variable expansion, meaning that it's possible to forward-declare references to other variables. Variables are resolved in the pipeline phase rather than the config file parsing phase. Provided a variable is declared, the engine will resolve it. Values assigned to all variables must adhere to POSIX‑sh syntax.

=== Environment Variable Expansion

Variable values may include parameter expansion or command substitution. To be expanded by the engine, they must use one of these forms:

- `${variable}`
- `$(command)`

Any other `$` (eg, `$VAR` or `$6$...`) is treated as literal and will be escaped.

[source,yaml]
----
device:
  name: controllerbox
  rev: 2
  hostname: ${IGconf_device_name}-$(uuidgen | cut -d'-' -f1)

image:
  assetdir: ${WORKSPACE}/build/assets/${IGconf_device_name}-rev${IGconf_device_rev}

ssh:
  pubkey_user1: ${DEPLOY}/device/baseassets/id_rsa.pub
  pubkey_only: y
----

Care must be taken if using the command line to assign a value to a variable if the value contains spaces or newlines. Making sure the calling shell expands it into a single argument ensures the command substitution happens once and stays on one line:

[source,bash]
----
rpi-image-gen build -c config.yaml -- "IGconf_ssh_pubkey_user1=$(< /path/to/.ssh/id_rsa.pub)"
----

Assigning a variable and preserving the literal value can be performed using single quotes:

[source,bash]
----
rpi-image-gen build -c config.yaml -- 'IGconf_ssh_pubkey_user1=$(cat /path/to/.ssh/id_rsa.pub)'
----

The above yield identical results in the build configuration for the value of `IGconf_ssh_pubkey_user1`. The difference is that the first expands the value immediately upon assignment using the calling shell (eg Bash) before engine processing. The second keeps the literal text, which is expanded during engine processing using POSIX-sh.

=== Expansion Context

Variables are resolved after configuration parsing and layer assembly, and then expanded. Expansion is performed with a **strict policy** using `/bin/sh` with `POSIXLY_CORRECT=1` under `set -eu` in a 'clean room' environment. This means:

  ** **errexit (set -e)**: Exit immediately if any command returns a non-zero exit status, including when variable expansion fails or returns an error.
  ** **nounset (set -u)**: Treat unset variables as errors during expansion - attempting to expand a variable that hasn't been set will exit with an error instead of expanding to an empty string.
  ** When these are combined, variable expansion is strict and fails quickly. Any attempt to expand an undefined variable will cause the build to exit immediately.

[NOTE]
====
There may be a need to handle non-alphanumeric characters in config files and/or command line arguments. Input files are parsed as-is, without stripping quotes. In YAML, quote only when you need YAML to treat the value as a string (eg, URLs can be unquoted: `url: https://...`). On the command line, use shell quoting when needed to protect special characters or expansions (eg, `rpi-image-gen build -c <args> -- IGconf_device_user1pass='Fo0bar!!'`).
====

=== Cross-Reference Expansion

Variables can reference other configuration variables:

[source,yaml]
----
device:
  class: pi5
  hostname: ${IGconf_device_class}-server

image:
  name: ${IGconf_device_class}-custom-image
----

=== Layer Variable Dependencies

Layer dependencies can use config or command line variable assignments to create dynamic dependency resolution:

[source,yaml]
----
# METABEGIN
# X-Env-Layer-Name: arch-specific-tools
# X-Env-Layer-Requires: base-layer,${ARCH}-toolchain,${DISTRO}-packages
# METAEND
----

This allows layers to dynamically depend on other layers based on build-time set variables:

[source,bash]
----
# Set variables on the command line
$ rpi-image-gen build -c <args> -- ARCH=arm64 DISTRO=debian
...
# Layer dependencies will be equivalent to:
# X-Env-Layer-Requires: base-layer, arm64-toolchain, debian-packages
----

This feature enables dynamic layer selection. For example, one usage could be to use the same layer across different build environments to support toolchain selection based on target architecture. By using variables in the 'parent' layer, dynamic dependency resolution pulls in an architecture specific toolchain 'child' layer.

[NOTE]
====
Layer discovery will fail if variables referenced in dependencies are not set.
====

[IMPORTANT]
====
Variable dependencies are evaluated during layer discovery, not during layer variable expansion. This ensures dependencies are resolved before layer processing begins. Only variables set in the config file or on the command line can be used in layer dependencies.

All dependencies are always included, i.e. variable names result in actual layer names at build-time. For example, `${ARCH}-toolchain` always results in a dependency, but the specific layer name depends on the `ARCH` environment variable value.
====

== Configuration Loading

=== Processing Overview

The configuration system processes files using the following steps:

1. **Parse main configuration file** - Automatically detects INI or YAML format
2. **Process includes recursively** - Follows include directives with circular dependency detection
3. **Apply command line overrides** - Processes variables specified after `--`
4. **Generate output** - Either loads into environment or writes to file

== Command Line Interface

=== Config Command

The `config` command provides direct access to configuration functionality:

[source,bash]
----
# Load all sections into environment
rpi-image-gen config myconfig.yaml

# Load specific section
rpi-image-gen config myconfig.yaml --section device

# Write resolved config to file
rpi-image-gen config myconfig.yaml --write-to build.env

# Use command line overrides
rpi-image-gen config myconfig.yaml -- IGconf_device_class=pi5 IGconf_image_compression=xz

# Custom include search paths
rpi-image-gen config myconfig.yaml --path "./config:./shared:./templates"

# Disable variable expansion
rpi-image-gen config myconfig.yaml --no-expand

# Combine options with overrides
rpi-image-gen config myconfig.yaml --section device --write-to build.env -- IGconf_device_class=pi5
----

=== Config Generation

Generate example configuration files:

[source,bash]
----
# Generate boilerplate INI and YAML examples
rpi-image-gen config --gen

# Migrate INI to YAML format
rpi-image-gen config legacy.cfg --migrate > modern.yaml
----

== Integration with Layer System

=== Layer Variable Discovery

The configuration system integrates with the layer management system to:

1. **Discover declared variables** from layer metadata
2. **Validate variable values** against declared constraints
3. **Apply variable policies** (immediate, lazy, force, skip)
4. **Resolve variable dependencies** between layers

=== Variable Policies

Variables support different assignment policies:

* **immediate**: Set the variable if it is currently unset (first-wins strategy). This is the default behavior.
* **lazy**: Applied after all layers are processed (last-wins strategy). Useful for defaults that can be overridden.
* **force**: Always overwrite existing environment value, regardless of what was set before.
* **skip**: Never set the variable.

Refer to the layer documentation for further details.

=== Layer Build Order

Variables are processed in layer dependency order, ensuring that:

1. **Base layer variables** are available to dependent layers
2. **Variable expansion** can reference previously set values
3. **Validation** occurs with complete variable context

== Best Practices

=== Configuration Organisation

1. **Use base configurations** for common settings across builds
2. **Layer-specific overrides** in focused configuration files
3. **Environment-specific values** in separate configuration files
4. **Runtime overrides** via command-line arguments after `--`

=== Variable Naming

1. **Follow prefix conventions** with logical section grouping
2. **Use descriptive names** that indicate purpose and scope
3. **Consistent naming patterns** within configuration sections

=== File Structure

[source]
----
config/
├── base.yaml              # Common base configuration
├── environments/
│   ├── development.yaml   # Development overrides
│   ├── staging.yaml      # Staging overrides
│   └── production.yaml   # Production overrides
└── variants/
    ├── local.yaml       # Local development settings
    └── ci.yaml          # CI/CD specific settings
----

=== Variable Expansion Security

1. **Validate input** in configuration files to prevent injection
2. **Limit variable scope** to prevent unintended expansion
3. **Use quotes** for values containing special characters
4. **Test expansion** in controlled environments before production

== Error Handling and Debugging

=== Common Configuration Issues

* **Circular includes**: Detected automatically with clear error messages
* **Missing include files**: Searches all configured paths before failing
* **Invalid YAML/INI syntax**: Provides line numbers and context
* **Undefined variable expansion**: Fails fast with variable name
* **Section/key conflicts**: Resolved by precedence rules

=== Debugging Configuration

1. **Use `--write-to`** to see resolved variable values
2. **Check precedence** with CFG/OVR output prefixes
3. **Validate includes** by examining search path messages
4. **Run interactively** to allow a pseudo 'dry-run' stepped flow
5. **Test expansion** with simple configuration files

=== Output Interpretation

Configuration loading outputs show variable sources:

[source]
----
CFG IGconf_device_class=pi5         # From configuration file
OVR IGconf_device_hostname=pi5-test  # From command line override
----

Layer collection output shows variable policy and evaluated value:

[source]
----
 [SET]  IGconf_device_class=pi5 (layer: rpi5)
 [SKIP]  IGconf_device_hostname (already set)
 [LAZY]  IGconf_device_variant=none (layer: device-base)
----

== Migration and Compatibility

=== INI to YAML Migration

Use the built-in migration tool:

[source,bash]
----
rpi-image-gen config legacy.cfg --migrate > modern.yaml
----

The migration tool:

* **Preserves include directives** with updated syntax
* **Maintains section structure** and variable relationships
* **Updates file extensions** in include references
* **Adds migration comments** for traceability

=== Backward Compatibility

The configuration system maintains compatibility with:

* **Existing INI files** through automatic format detection
* **Legacy include syntax** (`!include` vs `include:`)
* **Environment variable patterns** used by previous versions
* **Command-line interfaces** with extended functionality

== Performance Considerations

=== Configuration Loading Performance

* **Lazy evaluation** of variable expansion where possible
* **Caching of included files** to avoid repeated parsing
* **Minimal environment manipulation** during loading
* **Efficient precedence resolution** without redundant checks

== Summary

The rpi-image-gen configuration system provides a robust foundation for managing complex build configurations through:

* **Hierarchical variable organisation** with the `IGconf_` namespace
* **Multiple configuration sources** with clear precedence rules
* **Flexible file formats** (INI and YAML) with include support
* **Variable expansion** supporting cross-references and environment integration
* **Layer system integration** for variable discovery and validation
* **Command-line tools** for configuration management and debugging
